So the body or this what you call as yourself, evolves itself
in many different stages.
Looking at this evolution in yoga, we see this as seven
different stages, or we say 7 different bodies.
Man has seven different bodies need not necessarily mean
actually seven different bodies.
These are seven different stages in which one grows from zero to
seven up to seven years of age.
Only the physical body grows.
It is very important that a person's physical body grows
properly in these seven years.
If the necessary growth does not happen in this first seven
years, this person will never be physically healthy.
It doesn't matter.
He may manage, he may manage to live, but he will never know
true health.
He will never be, you know, carefree healthfulness will
never come to him if he doesn't achieve physical growth in seven
years time.
This is Tul Sharif or the grass body 7 to 14, another body which
is called as Bhava Sharif.
The emotional development of a person happens by the time they
reach 14.
They attain to sexual maturity and emotionally they are in a
certain state between 7 and 14.
You can see a child growing emotionally till seven he
doesn't have much emotions but from 7 to 14 slowly he becomes
an emotional being.
The Bawa Sharir evolves from here.
So when he comes here, his emotion becomes important.
Sexuality is also one of the basic emotions.
That's why it becomes very important when he attends to
this age.
Because the Bhava Sharir is developing that point from 14 to
21 next seven years, the Manasik Sharif or the mental body
evolves.
That is when the intellect develops.
Once bhava is properly established, then intellect
evolves, Education and other things come at.
You know, the peak of our education comes between 14 to
say 21, because that is the only time really man can grasp things
intellectually, the amount of learning that he can do at that
time later on or before that it is not really possible except in
a few extraordinary beings.
Generally for most average human beings the maximum learning
happens between 14 to 21 years of age.
So Manasik sharir or the mental body develops.
Today's modern world is created in such a way that only these
three things happen.
Suppose only physical body evolved.
The Bhav sharir did not develop properly.
That person only food and sleep will be the main things for him
only physical body.
He knows if he evolves only till bhav sharir.
And his mental body does not develop.
If his intellect does not evolve, then you will see
sexuality will be the most powerful thing in that person.
All kinds of perversions will arise out of this.
When intellect develops his interest to learn all these
things will come.
But generally today modern society is limited only to these
three states of the body, the physical body, the emotional
body, and the mental body.
After that we are not seeking any development.
The next seven years are for Divya Manas.
As you have a logical mind, there's another mind which is
completely different.
In yoga, we avoid this fourth level of development because
once you person goes into this, he becomes miraculous.
Many, many miracles start happening around him.
What is there can be here, what is here can be there.
You know what is happening there.
These kind of things.
In yoga, we seal this route.
We don't allow people to go into Divya Manas because it is still
mind.
It may be Divya means it's a grand mind.
You know mind on a much grander scale than that we know.
As mind is, once you enter this mind, you know everything you
know, not everything.
But when compared to other people, you look like a miracle.
Once this happens, people generally lose the next stage of
development.
Most people will not have the maturity to just push it aside
and go ahead.
They will always get entangled with this.
This is still a psychic state.
Now you can do telepathy, you can do Tele kindnesses, all
these things.
These are Divya manas.
From 21 to 28.
This mind can be easily developed.
This is a natural process.
At that stage it is very easy to develop that point, that kind of
ability.
But people who are on the spiritual path should never seek
that, because all that will end up with is a higher level of the
mind as it is.
Mind is deceptive.
A higher mind is even more deceptive.
It gets you entangled in a much deeper way than the lower mind.
So we just keep that aside.
This has happened in the past in so many ways, especially people
walking the tantric paths.
They always get entangled with Divya Manasa because they need
it to do their work.
The nature of the work is such they need this divyumanas.
Once they use it, they get enamored by it.
It is more attractive than anything that you know in your
life because you know you can do things little bit.
If you can start communicating with somebody just like that,
you wouldn't like to stop that, isn't it?
If you can move things without putting your hands to it, you
wouldn't like to stop that because the tantric practices
involve Divya manas.
Without it, they cannot do anything.
So there is always this danger that they usually have a setup
where the guru or the master who is there, keeps control,
complete control over their mind.
Only in certain situations they can use their mind.
That's how they are kept.
If we go into Tantra, that is how it is essential because once
the temptation of Divya Manas comes, it is more attractive
than anything that you know people would want to use it.
People would want to be with it because it looks like absolute.
Nobody will seek the absolute once they come to contact with
Divya Manas because it is so huge, so vast, so miraculous.
It feels like God.
You don't need anything more.
That's that's the kind of feeling that it creates.
But it also brings immense suffering as normally a person
who goes into Divya manas after
4748 years of life, tremendous
amount of suffering is brought about.
The next stage of development is called Atmasarif.
This is the soul or the soul body.
Normally most people think this is the ultimate nature.
This is not.
This is an absolute nature.
Now we have shifted from nature as we know it.
This stool, Sharir, Bawa Sharir manasika, sharir, Divya manas.
All these things are physical nature, higher and higher
levels, subtler and subtler ways.
Now once you move into Atma Sharir, you have moved away from
physical nature and you have moved into another nature if you
want to call it nature.
Or let us say we have moved into non nature which is no more
nature.
Loss of nature do not hold this anymore.
Normally most people understand becoming one with atmosphere.
It is everything which is not.
It is a very joyful state.
It is a state from which one cannot fall into fall down
again.
You cross the natural limits, one cannot fall down again.
But still it is not everything.
This is like being in heaven.
You are in great pleasure all the time.
You are very joyous.
The next stage of development is called as the cosmic body.
This is in traditional terms we can say this is Paramatma.
But generally most people once they attain to Atma, they even
deny the paramatma because it is so complete.
The danger of being totally stuck to Atmasari is very, very
much there.
And we have, you know, participant.
I don't want to put it in terms of numbers, but we have lots of
people, so many people who are like this.
They have become disembodied beings.
They are in Atmasari.
They are blissful.
The urge to seek the next has not come.
But till a person completely dissolves, there is no freedom.
It feels like mukti.
It is mukti in a certain way, because you have broken the
natural cycle.
Now you can neither come back nor can you go somewhere.
You are blissful, floating around in heavens.
These are the people who have been generally described as
angels.
This that you know all kinds of descriptions and additions.
Wings and other things have been given to them, but fundamentally
they have crossed physical nature.
They're in another blissful state which almost looks
absolute.
You have moved into absolute nature, but still it is not
everything.
Knowing beyond the nature in a limited way is Artana.
Knowing beyond the nature in an unlimited way is Paramatma.
Once a person attends to Atmasari generally he tends to
deny the Paramatma.
That's why so many teachings have come to us.
Aatman is everything people have said because they tasted the
absolute and they thought that is it.
The next is called as Sunya Sharir or Gautama called it as
Nirvana Sharir.
That means complete dissolution on the path of yoga.
We are trying to bypass a few things and go always to complete
emptiness, total dissolution, because till then the job is not
done.
Once we approach spirituality as a science, then we are not
looking for entertainment on the path.
A scientist is never looking for entertainment.
He discovers something.
He wants to make a rocket that goes to wherever another planet.
But in the beginning he may start it with a little
fireworks.
You know the little rocket what we use for the Diwali When he
lights it, he is only looking at it as a possibility, not as
entertainment.
So similarly on the yogic path, whatever little, little things
happen, we are only looking at it as a stepping stone for
something bigger that can happen.
We are never looking at it as a big entertainment and getting
enamored with that.
It is very, very important.
Little people feel like this in meditation.
They are thrilled and you find within two months they're again
down.
You know this is happening repeatedly because you get
entertained.
Don't get entertained with what is happening, what what is
happening.
Our thing is only to reach the goal.
Our thing is not to get caught up with the fair on the way.
If you go into the fair on the way, you never go to the end.
You are moving at the maximum pace that you can move, and you
are moving in the right direction.
That's all that matters to me.
Once a person has chosen the spiritual path, the way he sits,
the way he stands, the way he is, the way he speaks, the way
he thinks and the way he lives, everything has to be spiritual.
So every aspect of our life has to become yoga.
Every aspect of life has to become a process of growth.